 Essay on the Introduction to NITI Aayog in India
NITI Aayog or National Institution for Transforming India Aayog is basically a policy think tank of Government of India and State Governments that replaces 65-year old Planning Commission. Union Government of India had announced formation of NITI Aayog on 1st January, 2015.

Its primary job would be to undertake long term policy and design frameworks and take necessary initiatives for attaining faster development and finally to monitor these activities sincerely.


The NITI Aayog has set it objectives to develop mechanisms to formulate credible plans to the village level and aggregate these progressively at higher levels of government. This Aayog will ensure special attention to the sections of society that may be at risk of not benefitting adequately from economic progress.The NITI Aayog, will create a knowledge, innovation and entrepreneurial support system through a collaborative community of national and international experts, practitioners and partners. The Aayog will offer a platform for resolution of inter-sectoral and inter-departmental issues in order to accelerate the implementation of the development agenda.

Thus the NITI Aayog will try to frame a proper development policy for the country and will also seek to put an end to slow and tardy implementation of policy, by fostering better inter-ministry coordination and improve Centre-State coordination. It will also evolve a shared vision of national development priorities, and foster co-operative federalism, recognizing the motto that strong states make a strong nations.

NITI Aayog will have regional councils to focus on developmental activities on specific areas and is patterned on the National Reforms Development Commission of China.

While the Planning Commission had the power to allocate funds to states for attaining regional development, the NITI Aayog will not have such powers. Rather, the task of allocating funds to states now being vested with the Finance Ministry’s Department of Expenditure.

The NITI Aayog has set it objectives to develop mechanisms to formulate credible plans to the village level and aggregate these progressively at higher levels of government. This Aayog will ensure special attention to the sections of society that may be at risk of not benefitting adequately from economic progress.The NITI Aayog will also seek to put an end to slow and tardy implementation of policy by fostering better Inter-Ministry co-ordination and better centre-state co-ordination. It will help evolve a shared vision of national development priorities, and foster co-operative federalism, in order to focus on the view that strong states make a strong nation.



